# Update for Oct. 23 2013
## Kenneth Fortino


### Accomplished

* Deployed leaf bags in Daulton Pond (DP) and Campus Pond (CP)
* Harvested handling control for DP and CP

### To Do

1. Deploy leaf bags in Lancer Park Pond (LPP)

2. Harvest bags for first sample date from DP and CP

3. Generate field notes/lab notes for DP and CP deployments

4. Plan bag harvest for all ponds

#### To Do Details

1. I think we will plan on deploying Lancer Park bags on Tuesday of next week (Oct 29) if we can get enough availability.  Now that we know what we are doing it should be easier and go faster.  So leading up to that we need to:

    1. Make leaf bags

    2. Make and tie floats

    3. Make rock bags 
  
2. The first harvest date for DP and CP is slated for Oct. 24, which is Thursday - it would be OK if we sample these anytime between Thursday and Friday (Oct. 24 - 25).  Please coordinate among each other to figure out when these harvests will take place.  I can walk you through the harvest protocol if you have questions.

3. We need to make sure that we document all of the data that we are collecting.  I wasn't as strict as I should have been about recording things in the notebook as we were doing it but as long as we generate the field notes while it is still fresh in our heads that should be OK.  

**Make sure you do a `git pull` in the `pond_diversity_fcn` directory before you make any changes to the files because I have made a lot of changes.**

You can see examples of field notes on Github under `lab_notebook_entries/field_notes`.  Basically these notes need to detail all of the information that we will need to describe these experiments when we write the materials and methods for the paper in the future.  

You should include the specifics of the processes (e.g., what we did to collect the leaves, make the leaf bags, and then deploy them in the field).  What we are trying to generate is a digital lab notebook that we can all access when we need to know information about the experiments. Try to imagine what we might need to know 6 months (or 3 years) from now as we are writing the papers based on these experiments.

All of the entries should be markdown files (`file_name.md`) or plain text files (`file_name.txt`), this way they can be read on GitHub without downloading them. The files should be named something that makes sense and should not have any spaces in the file name.  Put the files in the `lab_notebook_entries` folder under the appropriate subfolder.

For this round I will assign the tasks but in the future you can just take the lead on those aspects of the project that you completed.

For this round:

* Kasey - Leaf collection (you will need to find out the approximate locations of where the leaves were collected from the other lab members) and bag construction
* Andreas - DP field notes and control harvest
* Annie - CP field notes
* Leanna - CP control harvest, also can you transfer all of the old lab notebook posts to GitHub.
   
