{\rtf1\ansi\deff0{\fonttbl{\f0 \fswiss Helvetica;}{\f1 Courier;}}
{\colortbl;\red255\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;}
\widowctrl\hyphauto

{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Narrative Description of the Project\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 {\b The impact of biodiversity on ecosystem function: organic matter breakdown in pond sediments.}\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Rationale\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Human activities have resulted in dramatic changes to many of the Earth's ecosystem processes. Forest clearing and the burning of fossil fuels have raised the altered the carbon cycle and changed the climate (CITE). Simultaneously human land-use has altered the distribution of many species and overall reduced the biodiversity of the Earth (CITE). One striking example of human land alteration is the construction of ponds. The number of man-made ponds is increasing exponentially (Downing) and in regions without abundant natural lakes, such as Virgina, man-made ponds represent a dominant freshwater habitat. At present the interaction of these simultaneous anthropogenic changes to aquatic habitat, biodiversity, and carbon cycling is poorly understood.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 The proposed project will evaluate the impact of biodiversity on the storage of organic carbon in the sediments of man-made ponds. Man-made ponds are acknowledged as understudied systems (Tranvik et al. 2009) and the relationship between biodiversity and ecosystem functioning is a fundamental question in ecology and environmental science. The proposed research in addition to advancing the field of aquatic ecology and our understanding of how human activities alter the biosphere, will contribute to the strong program in environmental science that is being developed at Longwood University. The Department of Biological and Environmental Sciences has several faculty who specialize in aquatic systems and thus the Department and the University have the potential to become a strong nucleus for aquatic biology. Establishing research projects in local systems will provide the foundation for the continued development of aquatic environmental science research at Longwood and provide opportunities for collaboration with Biological and Environmental Sciences faculty, as well as with researchers at other universities.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 This research project has been designed from the ground up to incorporate undergraduate research students. The project builds off of preliminary research that was begun at DePauw University in Indiana using only undergraduate researchers. That summer project resulted in 2 student poster presentations. The research described in this proposal is designed to lay the foundation of a research program that will provide extensive undergraduate research opportunities.\par}
}

